I was born in Brecon in South Wales, September 42,
attended local primary school,
and then attended Crass College boarding school as a day boy,
which is where I learned to play rugby,
which was quite important a few years later.
I went to the Cubs and Scouts in Brecon,
and climbed Penny Man many times with the Scouts,
so I was active.
As I say, it's a joke to everybody over here,
when you're born in Brecon, you're born with a pair of boots on.
And then September 54 to July 58, I was at Crass College,
a memorable day, 16th of October 1959,
I caught the stream train from Brecon to Hereford,
went out onto the yard,
and climbed into a bed for three tonne, REF-wise,
and that was where I started my REF life.
I said, my entrance at REF Hereford in the supply trade.
That went down for 18 months.
Of course, sport was one of the things we took part in,
excuse me, so rugby came into it again.
And also, there was another lad who had joined up from Ponticammer,
and he was rugby, I was a hooker, whereas he was on the wing.
I've remained in contact ever since.
In fact, we spoke to each other on Christmas Day this year.
So that's 61 years ago now, 62 years ago.
So 18 months at Hereford, passed out on the 24th of March 1961,
which is when you're in the force, you remember your service number,
and you remember mostly dates as well, the postage.
But on leaving Hereford, they sent me to 16 maintenance unit at Stafford,
which was not an operational unit.
It was a massive big storehouse with warehouses
over all different areas around Stafford.
And I was in the equipment, the office where all the requests for stock
came in to us initially, reprogrammed them and said,
right, we've got so much of this, so much of that,
it'll be sent out to you, something such.
We didn't work, we worked day shift basically,
but one had to sleep in the office at night in case any urgent priority demands came in.
So that's where my life started on shift, working night shifts in a way.
While I was at the area of Stafford, the people decided,
Oh, John Evans, you can go on a movements course to Arliff, Lindsay,
Curtindinje, Lincolnshire.
So I was there for six weeks learning how to unload, unload aircraft, et cetera,
do all the manifest for the ship, build some lading for ships,
and a great group convoy, policewives, et cetera,
checked if they could go under low bridges and the like.
So August 1963, having been at Stafford just over two years,
they sent me to 86th movement unit at Düsseldorf, Germany,
which was again a little unit with 10 RAF lads on a big army base.
We were there on the Rhine, they put the doctoral on the Rhine there,
and we know what freight was coming over on the ferry from Harwich or whatever to Rotterdam.
It would get transship then onto the barges and brought down the Rhine.
And we'd have no in advance, as I say, so when the bulky stuff was coming in,
we had to advise whichever unit would be requested the items to be on the dock side
with their wagons, pick it up.
So as it came off the barge, it went straight onto the lorry and back to base.
I enjoyed that.
One of the dockers there, a German lad named Henry,
he'd been in prison at war with Stockinghall Street, Glasgow,
and he always wore a bowler hat, all the time, a bowler hat.
And the first thing they went overboard when the lads went into the hold on the crane was a crate of beer.
They wouldn't work until they'd had a beer each, first thing.
And while I was there, again, I played rugby there.
It was while on the dock once that a smallish item fell off the crane and caught my left knee and broke my ankle.
So I had to go to hospital, and it was a German hospital being looked after by nuns.
I was there for about three days, and then they said, right, you're fitting up to move.
So I then went to a military hospital in Bedford for another week,
and then back to the unit because our unit had tussled off.
The corridor we actually hadn't slept in, the combination,
the next corridor was the actual offices, so I didn't have to go outside either.
It was all inside.
So I still carried on working there.
There for two and a half years.
While I was there, I bought a brand new Simca car, 450 Dodge Mars as it was there.
So when I came back after two and a half years in Dusseldorf, they posted me to Lyne, which, oh good,
this is a fully operational station with aircraft flying, transport command, not fighters, transport command,
Beverly Tigers, Britannias, Comet 2s and 4s, and then VC10s eventually.
And they put me in there as a trim clerk doing the weight and balance trim.
The lads would load the aircraft, and each aircraft was divided into compartments.
So they'd tell me how much weight had gone into each compartment,
and the air quarter master would submit the blank trim sheet initially
with the weight of the aircraft itself, the weight of the fuel that was going to be put on board,
and I put in the weight of the freight in the compartments.
Then they worked a graph out for the pilot to know how to take off, what angle, et cetera,
and how to keep a level on flight.
I was there for two and a half years, and then I got posted to Bahrain.
But when I was due to Bahrain, I sold the car for £450,
because I didn't have to pay any tax when I brought it into the country,
unless you keep it for two years.
So I was over two years having it there, so I didn't pay tax when I sold it,
but it sold for £450.
So I didn't lose a thing on that deal, because I suppose I must have got a cheap rate in the civil world.
I was posted from Lyon to Bahrain, I was there for 13 months.
It was a staging post for all the aircraft that left Lyon.
They'd go to Cyprus, Bahrain, Gange, Singapore and Hong Kong,
all go out to Cyprus and back to Bahrain and back.
We were a staging point for all the transport command.
And when I arrived and walked down the gang plank for the first time,
the local lads said, oh, you're cutting the moonies?
Of course, we were all white, weren't we?
Whereas they'd been there for a few months, and they were quite tanned by then.
So it took me a while, but I soon got a tan.
On days off, we'd clip clothes on and shorts,
and walk up the edge of the runway when we knew there was no aircraft coming in,
in the 40-plus degrees heat by the time we had climatised.
We were working out in the pans anyway, in all the heat.
The 13 months there, while there we used to go out on fishing trips
on the local down with a couple of Arabs.
I'm not a fisherman, but I used to go out there.
And we used to swim as well in the water.
Lovely clear water, nicely warm, etc.
That was great, that was for 13 months.
The only lady on the camp was the woman's voluntary service lady
who ran the local cafe, information place, etc.
But when we went off camp, we had to put long trousers on and long-sleeved shirts.
We weren't allowed off camp in shorts and T-shirts,
to agree with the local religious things.
See, that was 13 months.
I was then posted back to 16MU Stafford,
I said, oh no, not back there again, that's a boring job.
Surprisingly, on my arrival at the guardhouse at Stafford to book in,
the Snowdrop, or the Arab Police is the correct title,
said, oh, you've got to report to the station commander,
because what have we done wrong now?
So I went to the station wardrobes at first, which you will do,
and he said, oh yes, the station commander wants to see you,
from Cork, yes, come upstairs,
and he shook me hand and said, congratulations, SSC Ems,
you are now Corkle Ems, I got promoted.
So two takes on my arm.
It was all computerised by them in stores at Stafford,
and they put me on the emergency call-out team who go out at night
to different units to get the stuff and get it well organised in a way.
But having been in movements for six, seven years,
I had no idea how to work a computer, stores-wise,
so the lads carried me, I must admit, they showed me what to do,
and said if I could do it, they did it.
There were a good group of lads there.
But in the meantime, in the station weekly bulletin came an advert,
Corkle Storemen wanted a Sax of Aude.
The Sax of Aude, of course, is the most northerly island
of the Shetland group.
You can't go any further north until you go to Norway virtually.
So I applied, I was in three months, I was up at Aberdeen,
catching the overnight ferry to Lerwick,
which is on the mainland, the main town of Shetlands,
arrived there, I would say overnight, arrived in the morning,
bus into Lerwick town, bus from Lerwick to the north of the main island,
and then a little ferry, if you want to use the word correctly,
it was a rowing boat with an outboard boat at the back,
which should bus six people,
ten minute trip across to the middle island, the L,
and then you had a bus journey from that point there,
halfway across the island, changed buses, and joined the next trip.
The reason being why you had to change was two brothers
ran the bus services, but they'd fallen out.
So one had the southern area of the island,
one had the northern island section.
So I got up to the northern end of Yale,
and then another ferry, onboard motor on a sort of six-seater rowing boat,
arrived at Gutsjärg, G-U-T-C-H, which is the ferry point on the Udst,
U-N-S-T, which is where we were stationed,
and again a three-channel met me,
and took me up to Saxon Board,
introduced me to the sergeants in stores,
and were actually realized that I'd been on boots for seven years,
and said, oh no, not another one.
Obviously somebody else had been there as well,
who hadn't been on stores for quite a while.
So they introduced me again to their system of doing things.
I'd 18 months up there, I used to go walking on days off,
I was on the domestic side, where the radar side,
which was their prime reason for being there,
watching for the Russian Red Bears,
which were flying over into the UK airspace.
So I get a lift up to the radar side,
and then walk across the island, the turf, etc.,
to the most northern point of the UK,
and look over Muckle Plugger Lighthouse,
M-U-C-K-L-E-F-L-U-G-G-A, Muckle Plugger Lighthouse.
But you had to be careful during breeding season,
because they had what they called skewers,
which are seagulls, but rather large seagulls,
and they dive on you, and without a hat on,
they would literally put their clothes into your head.
That's the during breeding season.
I also had to be aware, because they laid their nests on the ground,
not in trees, because Zunst didn't have any trees,
as most of the Sheffield doesn't.
It's so windy up there.
I used to go across there quite often.
But one thing I remember, which didn't really affect me,
up on the radar side, there were three scanners up there,
but this other bit, between each building,
there were posts, they'd exit into the ground,
and there were ropes going from one post to another.
And when it was really windy,
you literally had to hang onto the ropes
to go from one building to another.
You went on the edge of the cliff, or such,
but you could get blown over and blown around.
And you had to put two parkas on.
It was that cold at times when you were outside up there.
So I had 18 months of it.
Other times, I used to go walking, talk to the Sheffield Cumbies.
They used to dance back across from me.
Not that I could understand them.
And then I had 18 months up there, posted back to UK,
to Arleigh of Thornay Island, which is on the Chastis Hancho border.
A little island just off Willis.
Not an island, that's Chastis.
A stream of divides, Thornay Island from the mainland.
That was in 1971.
I read it in D-Bomb in 1972.
But while I was there, I got warned,
Oh, you're going to Belfast Airport, Aldergrove,
but posted temporary.
So I arrived there the day after Bloody Sunday.
Monday, the day after Bloody Sunday.
Back to Movers, of course, not stores by now.
A few hair-raising occasions,
because I was on the camp all the time.
But every fourth night, two of us, myself and an SCC,
would go around with the Android Corporal on security control
around the perimeter every fourth night to support them.
I'd have a pistol in my holster,
and the SCC would have a rifle.
I think it was a Lee entry 303 still in those days.
Not these modern guns that they have.
So I did my time up there, then back to Thornay Island.
I was in the National Games, and D-Bomb's in September 1972.
That's my life in the RAF.
And then talking about sport,
one of the retired English cricket 15, Brian Statham,
did his national service at Stafford,
but this was before I ever got there.
And again, playing rugby,
one of the wings who was on his national service at the time,
I can't remember his name, but I think he was Sullivan,
but his uncle or father, not sure which again,
was a rugby league professional player playing for St Helens.
And I'm not sure if this lad, Don D-Bomb,
went into sport professionally or somebody else.
I'm not sure.
Changing the subject now slightly,
I was stationed at Lionand.
I was the trim clerk for all the aircraft.
And one of my jobs apart from doing the trim clerk,
every aircraft they left had what they called the station seat onboard,
which anybody working on the station could use to go anywhere
that that aircraft was going.
So I used to book myself a seat on the aircraft out to Cyprus,
because one of the lads I joined up with,
who I'm now still in contact with,
the party come in, Coline,
was married by then, stationed out there in Madden Quarters at Limassol.
And I used to go out for long weekends,
every three or four months,
on the botanical, whatever was going out.
The only risk you had, you wouldn't definitely get a seat back.
You had to be careful because you couldn't book a seat back
in case it was taken up by some emergency.
But lucky enough, I managed to get back every time,
step off the aircraft, quick shower, uniform, and straight to work.